Australian Government
Crisis Management
Framework
September 2025
Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
© Commonwealth of Australia 2025
Effective from the date of endorsement by Deputy
Secretary Economy, Industry and Resilience Group,
PM&C, in September 2025
This Framework is reviewed annually.
For the latest version, please visit:
https://www.pmc.gov.au/resources/australian-
government-crisis-management-framework-agcmf.

Copyright Notice
With the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of
Arms, this work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY 4.0)
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




Third party copyright
Wherever a third party holds copyright in this material,
the copyright remains with that party. Their permission
may be required to use the material. Please contact
them directly.

Attribution
This publication should be attributed as follows:
© Commonwealth of Australia, Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet, Australian Government
Crisis Management Framework.

Use of the Coat of Arms
The terms under which the Coat of Arms can be used are
detailed on the following website: https://pmc.gov.au/cca

Feedback
Feedback for future improvement and enquiries
regarding this document are welcome at:
Crisis Planning and Response, Resilience and Crisis
Management Division, Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet.
Email agcmfreview@pmc.gov.au.
Version control


 Date              Version       Comments

 December             1.0        Replaces AGCMF (Version 5.0) and Australian Government Crisis
 2012                            Management Arrangements: A Guide for Ministers (Version 1.1).
                                 1.1 Replaces AGCMF (Version 1.0) and reflects the Abbott Ministry
                                 and Administrative Arrangements Order of 18 September 2013.
                                 1.2 Replaces AGCMF (Version 1.1) and reflects the appointment of the
                                 Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Counter-Terrorism and the
                                 Commonwealth Counter-Terrorism Coordinator.
                                 1.3 Replaces AGCMF (Version 1.2) and reflects the role of the Minister
                                 for Counter-Terrorism.

 October              2.0        Replaces AGCMF (Version 1.3).
 2016
                                 2.1 Replaces AGCMF (Version 2.0) and reflects updated administrative
                                 arrangements.
                                 2.2 Replaces AGCMF (Version 2.1) and reflects updated administrative
                                 arrangements following establishment of the Home Affairs portfolio.
                                 2.3 Replaces AGCMF (Version 2.2) and reflects updated administrative
                                 arrangements following the establishment of new ministerial portfolios
                                 focused on natural disasters and emergency management and revised
                                 Defence Assistance to the Civil Community (DACC) arrangements.
                                 This version also reflects the retirement of the Council of Australian
                                 Governments arrangements and associated structures.

 July                 3.0        Replaces AGCMF (Version 2.3) and reflects the Government’s response
 2021                            to the Royal Commission into National Natural Disaster Arrangements.
                                 3.1 Administrative updates to describe the Australian Government
                                 National Joint Common Operating Picture and Australian Public Service
                                 Surge Reserve and provide updated detail on the handover arrangements
                                 from Emergency Management Australia to National Recovery and
                                 Resilience Agency.
                                 3.2 Replaces AGCMF (Version 3.1) and reflects updated administrative
                                 arrangements including the establishment of the National Emergency
                                 Management Agency.
                                 3.3 Replaces AGCMF (Version 3.2) and reflects updated administrative
                                 arrangements including the addition of a Cyber Incident annex.

 September            4.0        Replaces AGCMF (Version 3.3) and incorporates significant reforms
 2024                            reflecting the Australian Government’s response to the 2023 Review
                                 of the Australian Government Crisis Management Framework.

 September            4.1        Replaces AGCMF (Version 4.0) and reflects minor administrative updates.
 2025



1 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Contents
Introduction4
    Purpose5
    Australian, state and territory governments                   6
        What is a crisis under the Framework?                     7
        Triggers for Australian Government crisis coordination    7
    Principles8
        Administrative arrangements                               8
    Hierarchy of documents                                        9
    Australian Government Crisis Management Continuum            10
    Scope of crisis coordination within the Continuum            11
    Australian Government assistance                             12
        Financial assistance                                     12
        Non-financial assistance                                 12
        International assistance                                 12

Preparedness14
    Crisis Arrangements Committee                                16
    Australian Government crisis capabilities                    16
        Situational awareness                                    16
        Crisis Appreciation and Strategic Planning               17
        Australian Government Crisis Coordination Team           18
        Crisis surge workforce                                   18
        Exercising18
    Continuous improvement                                       19
    Review and update of the Framework                           19

Crisis coordination                                              20
    Coordination functions                                       21
    A 4-tier model for crisis coordination                       23




2 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
    Roles and responsibilities                                               24
        The Prime Minister                                                   29
        Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet                         29
        National Emergency Management Agency                                 30
    Decision-making and coordination mechanisms                              31
        The National Security Committee of Cabinet                           32
        National Coordination Mechanism                                      32
        Australian Government NCM                                            35
        Capabilities that support the NCM                                    35
        Inter-Departmental Emergency Task Force                              36
        Portfolio-based mechanisms                                           36
        Special and temporary mechanisms                                     36
        Strategic crisis policy coordination                                 37
    Coordination for extreme to catastrophic crises (Tier 4)                 38
        Coordination arrangements                                            39

Recovery40
    Recovery planning                                                        42
    Longer-term recovery                                                     42

Key legislation                                                              44

Appendices46
    Appendix A                                                               47
        Designated Lead Ministers, Lead Coordinating Senior Officials and
        Australian Government Coordinating Agencies for identified hazards   47
    Appendix B                                                               55
        Cross-sectoral all-hazards plans and arrangements                    55
    Appendix C                                                               56
        Abbreviations56




3 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Introduction




Australian Medical Assistance Team (AUSMAT)
(National Critical Care and Trauma Response Centre)
Purpose
The Australian Government Crisis Management Framework (the Framework) is the Australian
Government’s capstone policy framing Australia’s national crisis management arrangements.
The Framework takes an all-hazards approach to crisis management, recognising the need
for consistency across the Australian Government’s crisis management systems in preparation
for the full spectrum of hazards that may affect life, property or the natural environment.
The Framework outlines how the Australian Government prepares for, responds to
and supports recovery from crises by:
  • providing an overview of the Australian Government crisis management arrangements
  • outlining the Australian Government’s approach to crisis preparedness, including crisis
    preparedness arrangements and capabilities
  • articulating the requirements for Australian Government responses spanning near-term
    preparedness, response, relief and early recovery by:
       ◦ designating the lead Australian Government ministers, senior officials and agencies
         required to coordinate responses to identified hazards
       ◦ outlining the roles and responsibilities of Australian Government ministers
         and senior officials
       ◦ detailing the approach to coordination for extreme to catastrophic crises.
The Framework focuses on crisis management arrangements for identified hazards (see
Appendix A on p. 47). Within the context of the Australian Government Crisis Management
Continuum (p. 10), the Framework does not address prevention, longer-term recovery,
reconstruction and risk reduction. It is not intended for crises predominately managed by policy
intervention, including financial and economic crises.
The Framework underpins Australian Government responses to crises that occur within
Australia, including Indian Ocean Territories, Norfolk Island and the Jervis Bay Territory,
as well as to crises that affect Australians and Australian interests overseas.
The Framework is intended for Australian Government ministers and senior officials with
a role in crisis management. An accompanying Handbook to the Australian Government Crisis
Management Framework (the Handbook) provides principles-based guidance for senior
officials and their agencies on how to apply the Framework.
The Framework designates the following roles for each identified hazard:
  • Lead Minister
  • Australian Government Coordinating Agency
  • Lead Coordinating Senior Official.
For more details on these roles, see the Principles section on p. 8 and the Roles and
responsibilities section on p. 24.




5 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
   The Framework outlines arrangements to support whole of Australian Government and
   national coordination in response to crisis. Whole of Australian Government coordination
   encompasses all Australian Government portfolios while national coordination refers
   to the inclusion of all government jurisdictions and other key stakeholders as relevant.
   Australian Government agencies work across both whole of Australian Government
   and national coordination.1




Australian, state and territory governments
Australia’s states and territories are the first responders to incidents that occur within their
jurisdictions. States and territories are responsible for crisis management at the jurisdictional
level, including preparedness, response, relief and recovery.
The Australian Government does not seek to replicate the capabilities of states and
territories. However, the Australian Government possesses strategic and operational
capabilities that can ensure decisive action is taken during significant crises. The Australian
Government seeks to harness national resources and ensure they are applied in appropriate,
proportionate and equitable ways to secure the safety of all Australians.
The Australian Government:
   • provides shared situational awareness and support to states and territories when
     coordinated assistance is requested
   • undertakes and improves coordination of threat and security risk assessments
     and provides national security capabilities for significant crises
   • supports a state or territory where, in the judgement of the Australian Government
     and following consultation with relevant jurisdictions where practicable, the nature of
     a crisis has or is expected to exceed the sovereign capacities of that state or territory
   • jointly manages a crisis with states and/or territories if a crisis has the potential to
     affect, or has affected, multiple jurisdictions, the broader community or an Australian
     Government area of responsibility (such as the international dimension of a crisis)
   • protects Australians and Australian interests overseas
   • manages a crisis that is not the responsibility of states and territories
   • works with states, territories, industry and the public to build national resilience
     against future hazards, particularly those with national consequences
   • provides financial assistance to eligible Australian residents who are adversely
     affected by a crisis.




1 ‘Australian Government’ refers to government entities commonly described as ‘federal’ or ‘Commonwealth’, such as the
  Australian Government Department of Education. ‘National’ is broader in scope – it includes the Australian Government, state
  and territory governments, local governments, industry, civil society and any other entities that have interests in a crisis.

6 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
    What is a crisis under the Framework?

    For the purpose of this Framework, a crisis is an event that requires an immediate
    Australian Government response outside business-as-usual arrangements to manage
    potential or realised acute consequences and mitigate further harm. A crisis may:
     • be natural, human-induced2 or technology-caused
     • cause wide-ranging harmful impacts across multiple sectors or jurisdictions within
       Australia, or significant impacts on any sector or jurisdiction, either immediately
       or over time
     • adversely impact Australian lives, property and the environment, or our national
       security, interests or assets
     • significantly impact Australian Government interests or assets, such as critical
       infrastructure or Australian Government services
     • affect Australians or Australian interests overseas
     • affect public trust in government institutions.
    Crises by nature are difficult to predict and are associated with high levels of uncertainty.
    As each crisis will present unique challenges of varying severity and complexity, there
    is no standardised response. The Framework articulates the Australian Government’s
    scalable approach to managing these challenges.




Triggers for Australian Government crisis coordination
Triggers to activate Australian Government crisis coordination arrangements set out
in this Framework may include:
    • an event meeting the definition of a crisis above
    • formal ministerial consideration of the crisis event(s)
    • community expectations of national leadership during the crisis
    • requests for assistance from affected states, territories or countries
    • multiple crises occurring simultaneously or compounding and escalating in complexity
      which require national coordination, resource prioritisation and de-confliction.
This Framework and the Handbook set out a 4-tier model of crisis coordination to support
the application of crisis management arrangements. The Handbook provides guidance on
assessing crisis events in the context of the tiers model.




2   This includes health and biosecurity events.

7 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Principles
The Framework is underpinned by the following principles and administrative arrangements
to assist Australian Government decision-makers navigate priorities and decision-making
in time-limited and challenging situations. These principles and arrangements should be
considered and applied in all supporting documents identified in the Framework’s hierarchy
of documents, including all national plans (see Figure 1).
The Framework:
   • contributes to:
     ◦ protecting lives and reducing harm
     ◦ protecting property and the environment and safeguarding national interests and assets
     ◦ providing national leadership and maintaining public trust and confidence in
         government systems
     ◦ national capability sharing and prioritisation
     ◦ continual improvement
   • promotes a unity of effort across Australian, state and territory governments,
     civil society and the private sector
   • acknowledges human rights considerations to ensure that measures enacted during
     crises are necessary, reasonable and proportionate
   • acknowledges community at the core of response and recovery and the consideration
     of the needs of Australians who may be disproportionately at risk of harm
   • acknowledges the importance of recognising and engaging with First Nations people
     and their communities before, during and after crises
   • supports near-term crisis planning and preparedness, immediate crisis response and
     early recovery arrangements for events that impact Australians and Australian interests,
     domestically and internationally
   • is underpinned by the principle of subsidiarity3 and supports state and territory
     government crisis response and early recovery
   • takes an all-hazards approach to crisis management
   • is for significant imminent, current and future crises
   • is a scalable and adaptable model that supports a coordinated approach across
     domestic and international crises.


Administrative arrangements
The establishment of the roles of Lead Minister, Australian Government Coordinating
Agency and Lead Coordinating Senior Official (p. 24) under the Framework does not
displace the existing executive responsibilities of ministers and senior officials. During a
crisis, ministers and senior officials retain their statutory powers, with agencies and officials
continuing to report to their respective ministers. This applies across all tiers of crisis
coordination.
The 4-tier model of crisis coordination (p. 23) describes an overarching approach to whole
of Australian Government coordination. It does not supersede sector-specific responsibilities,
authority or the operational descriptors used to classify the level of crisis response
(for example, as set out in national plans).

3 Subsidiarity refers to the proximity of government to the community. The principle of subsidiarity is a core feature of federalism.
  Under a federal system such as in Australia, powers are distributed between a central government and regional governments.

8 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Hierarchy of documents
A hierarchy of documents underpins the Australian Government’s crisis management
arrangements. Documents subordinate to the Framework must align with the Framework
in describing their specific arrangements.




                                                                         Framework



                                                                          Handbook



                                                                      National Plans



                                                        Sub-Sector Operational Plans



                                                                SOPs and Templates




Figure 1. The hierarchy of documents

  • The Framework is the Australian Government’s capstone policy framing Australia’s
    national crisis management arrangements. It is maintained by the Department of
    the Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&C).
  • The Handbook complements the Framework and provides principles-based crisis
    management guidance for senior officials. It is maintained by PM&C.
  • National plans for hazards identified in this Framework articulate the hazard-specific
    coordination arrangements, their linkages to Australian Government coordination
    arrangements, relevant legislation and application of the principles of this Framework.
    These plans are maintained by relevant Australian Government agencies.
  • Sub-sector operational plans, where required, articulate operational requirements,
    responsibilities and governance for specific types of incidents within a sector.
    They are maintained by the relevant portfolio agencies and aligned to relevant
    national plans.
  • Standard operating procedures (SOPs) and templates support consistent responses
    across Australian Government agencies. They are maintained by the relevant
    portfolio agencies.
A list of national plans for identified hazards in this Framework can be found in Appendix A
(p. 47). Sub-sector operational plans are referenced within relevant national plans.
The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) maintains guidance to support
Australian Government agencies in developing, reviewing and maintaining their plans.

9 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Australian Government Crisis Management Continuum

                                     Crisis coordination spanning
                      near-term preparedness, response, relief and early recovery



   Prevention         Preparedness      Response           Relief            Recovery           Reconstruction   Risk reduction




Figure 2. Phases of the Australian Government Crisis Management Continuum

The Australian Government’s Crisis Management Continuum (Continuum) comprises 7 phases:
1. Prevention refers to measures to eliminate or reduce the severity of a hazard or crisis,
   and/or the likelihood of a hazard or crisis occurring. Prevention is not covered by
   this Framework.
2. Preparedness refers to arrangements to ensure that, should a crisis occur, the required
   resources, capabilities and services can be efficiently mobilised and deployed. Near-term
   preparedness recognises the need to rapidly prepare for an imminent crisis. For more
   detail on preparedness, refer to the Australian Disaster Preparedness Framework.4
3. Response refers to immediate actions taken to ensure that crisis impacts and
   consequences are minimised, and that those affected are supported as quickly
   as possible.
4. Relief refers to meeting the essential needs of food, water, shelter, energy,
   communications and essential medical services for those affected by a crisis event.
5. Recovery refers to early and longer-term measures to restore or improve the livelihoods,
   health, economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets, systems and
   activities, of a disaster-affected community or society. Early recovery includes temporary
   and near-term measures to support anticipated community needs. Recovery measures
   should align with the principles of sustainable development and ‘build back better’5 to
   avoid or reduce future disaster risk6.
6. Reconstruction refers to implementing longer-term strategies post-incident to ‘build
   back better’ from a crisis, including identifying sustainable development approaches and
   mitigation measures that may be applicable beyond the directly affected community.
   Reconstruction is not covered by this Framework.
7. Risk reduction refers to reducing future risk by identifying and enacting measures that
   may be taken to reduce the impacts and consequences of future crises. Risk reduction is
   not covered by this Framework. Refer to the National Disaster Risk Reduction Framework7
   for more information.

4 The Australian Disaster Preparedness Framework is available at:
  https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/australian-disaster-preparedness-framework.pdf
5 A definition of ‘build back better’ is available at: https://www.undrr.org/terminology/build-back-better
6 This is defined by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) at:
  https://www.undrr.org/terminology/recovery
7 The National Disaster Risk Reduction Framework is available at:
  https://www.nema.gov.au/sites/default/files/2024-08/national-disaster-risk-reduction-framework.pdf

10 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Across the Continuum, resilience refers to the ability of a system, community or society
exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, accommodate, adapt to, transform and recover from
the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through the preservation
and restoration of its essential basic structures and functions through risk management.8
The Australian Institute for Disaster Resilience (AIDR) publishes a collection of handbooks that
provide guidance on national principles and practices for crisis resilience, including elements
of the 7 phases of the Continuum.9


Scope of crisis coordination within the Continuum
This Framework establishes arrangements and capabilities to support crisis coordination
during the phases of near-term preparedness, response, relief and early recovery.
These arrangements and capabilities are the primary focus of the Framework, which seeks to
provide clear and robust arrangements to support rapid and effective Australian Government
and national coordination during crisis. The full spectrum of the preparedness and recovery
phases are also considered, acknowledging that phases of the continuum do not stand in
isolation of each other.


                                  Crisis coordination spanning
                   near-term preparedness, response, relief and early recovery




  Preparedness                     Response                        Relief                           Recovery




Figure 3. The phases on which this Framework focuses




8 As defined by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR): https://www.undrr.org/terminology/resilience
9 The AIDR Handbook Collection is available at: https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/collections/handbook-collection/

11 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Australian Government assistance

Financial assistance
The Australian Government may provide financial assistance to states and territories
to support prevention and preparedness activities.
The Australian Government may provide financial assistance to states and territories
for eligible response, recovery and resilience activities through programs such as the
Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA).

The Australian Government may directly support eligible individuals through programs
such as the:
  • Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)10
  • Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)11
  • Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP).12


Non-financial assistance
The Australian Government may provide non-financial assistance to states and territories to
support preparedness activities, including planning advice and crisis management exercises.
The Australian Government may receive requests for or offer non-financial assistance to
affected countries, states and/or territories.
Australian Government agencies may provide specific capabilities from within their portfolio
to assist with a crisis response. Where possible, this assistance should be facilitated through
Australian Government national plans.


International assistance
The Australian Government has the capacity to rapidly deploy humanitarian assistance to
countries when they ask for help during crises. Australia’s humanitarian assistance is led by
the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) and focuses on helping communities
and governments prepare for, and respond to, disasters.
Where a foreign government requests, or is offered, Australian assistance, the deciding
minister is responsible for the costs incurred, including if the minister has agreed to the
deployment of state and territory resources. This is the case unless other arrangements
are established or specified in an Australian Government national plan listed in Appendix A.




10 Details of the AGDRP are available at: https://www.disasterassist.gov.au/disaster-arrangements/disaster-recovery-payment
11 Details of the DRA are available at: https://www.disasterassist.gov.au/disaster-arrangements/disaster-recovery-allowance
12 Details of the AVTOP are available at:
   https://www.disasterassist.gov.au/disaster-arrangements/australian-victim-of-terrorism-overseas-payment

12 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Australian Aid (Department of Defence)


13 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Preparedness
  Preparedness                   Response                       Relief                         Recovery




Figure 4. The preparedness phase of the Continuum

Preparedness refers to the activities that build the capabilities and capacity needed to
efficiently manage crises and effectively transition from response to sustained recovery.
Australian Government agencies should ensure they build and maintain a sufficient level
of crisis preparedness.
Near-term preparedness refers to a period within the preparedness phase of the continuum
that requires senior officials and agencies to rapidly prepare to respond to forecast or
potential impacts and consequences of an imminent crisis. This period could be marked by
a sudden shift in the crisis threat environment generating potential for significant and acute
consequences to Australia or Australian interests. The principle of ‘speed to action, speed
to decision’ would now drive preparedness and response behaviours and an increased
level of coordination actions across government would be expected.
The Lead Minister is responsible for ensuring their portfolio is prepared to coordinate whole
of Australian Government responses to significant crises, including familiarity with relevant
legislation and sufficient staffing capacity or surge arrangements. The Lead Coordinating
Senior Official is responsible for ensuring their agency (as the Australian Government
Coordinating Agency) is prepared.
To maintain crisis preparedness, the Australian Government Coordinating Agency is
responsible for developing, maintaining, exercising and evaluating the capabilities required
to coordinate Australian Government responses to the hazard(s) designated to the agency.
These capabilities include:
  • a national plan for each identified hazard designated to the agency by this Framework
    (see Appendix A on p. 47)
  • sector-specific crisis coordination mechanisms and arrangements
  • a trained workforce with appropriate security clearances
  • planning capability and familiarity with relevant crisis tools
  • systems and processes used in crisis management.
The Australian Disaster Preparedness Framework can help to inform the strategic
governance, policy and investment required to support national disaster preparedness.13




13 The Australian Disaster Preparedness Framework is available at:
   https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/australian-disaster-preparedness-framework.pdf

15 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Crisis Arrangements Committee
The Crisis Arrangements Committee (CAC) is the peak Australian Government senior
officials’ crisis management preparedness committee. It has a role in ensuring that
Australian Government operational crisis planning and preparedness activities are undertaken
to address any identified critical gaps and that crisis arrangements remain fit-for-purpose
in a changing threat environment. The CAC:
  • annually reviews and updates the list of identified hazards in the Framework
  • oversees the development of new national plans when required
  • oversees the maintenance of national plans and arrangements and the review of the full
      suite of national plans at least once every 3 years for ongoing relevance, currency and
      alignment with the Framework
  • annually reviews and reports to departmental secretaries on the status of cross-
      government crisis management capability, capacity and surge workforce, and provides
      advice if required to address vulnerabilities
  • oversees Australian Government and relevant multinational crisis exercises and advises
      departmental secretaries on gaps and priorities for whole of Australian Government
      exercising
  • where a significant crisis prompted Tier 3 or 4 coordination, considers the outcomes
      of the whole of Australian Government evaluation to ensure identified lessons are
      integrated into continuous improvement processes across the Australian Government.


Australian Government crisis capabilities
Australian Government agencies maintain capabilities to operationalise their designated roles
under national plans. The Australian Government also maintains a number of capabilities
to support whole of Australian Government and national coordination. These capabilities
enhance situational awareness, coordination and response during a significant crisis,
and complement existing state and territory capabilities.

Situational awareness
Whole of Australian Government situational awareness supports decision-making by ministers
and senior officials to prioritise resources during a crisis and provide up-to-date information
to the public.
The Australian Government National Situation Room (NSR) provides 24/7 all-hazards
situational awareness, impact analysis and decision support capability, through its crisis
operations, anticipatory analysis and planning capabilities. Australian Government agencies,
states and territories may be invited to deploy a liaison officer into the NSR to facilitate
coordination, collaboration, and communication between the Australian Government and
affected jurisdictions.
The National Joint Common Operating Picture (NJCOP) is managed by the NSR and
provides a near real time, all-hazards platform designed to display all active significant crisis
events. It provides a shared and common understanding both nationally and across borders
during crisis events.
Both the NSR and the NJCOP are managed by the National Emergency Management Agency
(NEMA) on behalf of the Australian Government.

16 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  The National Situation Room and the NJCOP (NEMA)


DFAT’s Australian Government Global Watch Office (GWO) operates 24/7 to support the
Australian Government’s capacity to monitor and respond to emerging international events
and crises that may have consequences for Australians or Australian interests overseas.
GWO reporting and analysis provides situational awareness and informs whole of Australian
Government messaging on evolving events, while also supporting diplomatic posts in the
event of a crisis. The GWO issues alerts and situation reports based on advice provided by
Australian diplomatic posts and the insights available through aggregated consular data.
DFAT will activate its Crisis Centre (CC) for significant and ongoing international crises,
embedding any agencies that have equity in the whole of government response.


Crisis Appreciation and Strategic Planning
The Crisis Appreciation and Strategic Planning (CASP)14 methodology is a structured,
systematic methodology that uses strategic and critical thinking and conceptualises the
big picture in crisis planning. It supports practitioners to manage challenges including
concurrent events, consequences of uncertainty and complexity. It can be used by
Australian, state and territory governments to conduct strategic planning and informs
crisis decision-making at all levels.




14 The CASP Guidebook is available at:
   https://www.nema.gov.au/sites/default/files/2024-09/CASP%20Guidebook%20-%20version%201.4%20August%202024.PDF

17 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Australian Government Crisis Coordination Team
An Australian Government Crisis Coordination Team (CCT) can be established by NEMA to
support coordination of Australian Government actions, in line with the strategic intent set
by the National Coordination Mechanism (NCM). It may bring together representatives from
relevant Australian Government agencies, as well as other key stakeholders and employs the
CASP methodology to support strategic planning activities and decision support products.


Crisis surge workforce
Australian Government Coordinating Agencies are responsible for maintaining a surge
cohort of appropriately trained staff with appropriate security clearances to coordinate and
respond to a crisis.
There will be times when there is a requirement for staff to surge across the public service
to support response activity. The Australian Public Service Commission (APSC) maintains a
surge reserve that mobilises Australian Public Service (APS) staff in large numbers to respond
to significant crises when required. Any agency may request this capability from the APSC.


Exercising
The Australian Government regularly conducts crisis exercises to ensure the preparedness
of relevant Australian Government agencies for crisis response. This Framework and
the Handbook are tested as part of these exercises with a focus on coordination
arrangements for extreme to catastrophic crises (p. 38), escalation pathways and
related coordination mechanisms.
NEMA delivers an annual national crisis exercising program, maintains shared awareness
across government agencies of national crisis exercises, and reports on insights and learnings
from exercises, to inform future preparedness, policy and capability requirements.
The Department of Home Affairs, through the Australia-New Zealand Counter-Terrorism
Committee (ANZCTC), manages the Counter-Terrorism National Tiered Exercise Program in
partnership with states and territories. This program validates and strengthens Australia’s
national counter-terrorism capabilities to support counter-terrorism prevention, preparedness
and response.
The NEMA and ANZCTC programs deliver whole of government crisis exercising and build
national exercising capability through complementary capability development programs.
Agencies across the Australian Government also deliver crisis exercising and capability
development for identified hazards and sectoral responses.
Agencies with crisis management responsibilities under the Framework are required to
regularly exercise their national plans and arrangements. Agencies identified as owners
of national plans and arrangements under the AGCMF (see Appendix A and B) will, where
appropriate, share their intent to exercise and the exercise outcomes for those plans and
arrangements with Australian Government agencies. The information will be shared with
agencies through the CAC to support collaboration, shared efficiencies and identify gaps
in national preparedness for continuous improvement.



18 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  The National Preparedness Summit at Australian Parliament House in 2023




Continuous improvement
Continuous improvement practices draw on learnings from evaluation of exercising and crisis
events. These learnings are used to identify opportunities for continuous improvement of
crisis management plans and arrangements to enhance crisis management preparedness.
The Australian Government conducts evaluation of its crisis management activities to ensure
lessons are identified and integrated into whole of Australian Government continuous
improvement practices.
Within 12 months of a significant crisis prompting Tier 3 or 4 crisis coordination, the
Australian Government Coordinating Agency will conduct a whole of Australian Government
evaluation. The outcomes of the evaluation should be distributed across the Australian
Government and reported to the CAC to ensure identified lessons are integrated into
continuous improvement processes managed through the CAC.


Review and update of the Framework
This Framework and the Handbook are reviewed annually. A comprehensive review will occur
every 5 years, as well as following significant or novel crises. An administrative review will be
conducted in all other years and may be prompted by machinery of government changes.
The appropriate Deputy Secretary PM&C maintains editorial control over the Framework
on behalf of the Australian Government. Updates to the Framework will be coordinated by
PM&C in close consultation with NEMA and other Australian Government agencies. Updates
to the Framework will be released prior to the annual Higher Risk Weather Season and, where
necessary, updates may be issued outside this cycle. It is intended that wherever possible,
changes to the Framework will be avoided during extended periods of high operational activity.



19 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Crisis
coordination
                                 Crisis coordination spanning
                  near-term preparedness, response, relief and early recovery




  Preparedness                   Response                  Relief                     Recovery




Figure 5. Crisis coordination spans near-term preparedness, response,
relief and early recovery

A critical purpose of the Framework is articulating Australian Government coordination
requirements for the near-term preparedness, response, relief and early recovery phases
of the Continuum (see Figure 2). During these phases, actions are taken in anticipation of,
during or immediately after a crisis to ensure that its effects are minimised and that those
affected are given relief and support as quickly as possible.
To support this, the Framework:
  • sets out the role of the tiered model for coordination
  • designates lead Australian Government ministers and agencies required to coordinate
    responses to identified hazards
  • outlines the roles and responsibilities of Australian Government ministers and senior officials
  • details the approach to coordination for extreme to catastrophic crises.


Coordination functions

 Coordination functions for near-term preparedness, response, relief and early recovery

Situational          Monitor              Convene         Crisis          Strategic       Continuous
awareness            impacts and          crisis forums   communication   planning        improvement
                     consequences                         and public
                                                          messaging


Figure 6. Coordination functions




21 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
The Lead Coordinating Senior Official performs functions to support near-term
preparedness for, response to and early recovery from crisis (see Figure 6), including:
  • facilitating near real time shared situational awareness across the Australian
    Government (using situation reports and relevant forums)
  • monitoring impacts and consequences of the crisis across all sectors
  • convening crisis forums
  • coordinating a whole of Australian Government crisis communication strategy and
    ensuring dissemination of whole of Australian Government crisis communication
    products and public information (including whole of government talking points)
  • conducting strategic planning to:
       ◦ identify Australian Government equities
       ◦ establish and facilitate agreement to whole of Australian Government coordination
         priorities and objectives, response requirements and responsibilities
       ◦ coordinate cross-government advice to relevant ministers
  • conducting a post-incident evaluation of significant crises to inform continuous
    improvement of Australian Government capabilities and arrangements.


   During crisis, coordination efforts by the Australian Government should:
     • provide senior officials with an accurate and unified picture of the crisis
     • support decision-making by ministers and key decision-making bodies
     • ensure consistent public messaging and information
     • maintain public safety and trust in government institutions
     • ensure ministerial directions are effectively implemented across government
     • de-conflict government actions and support effective resource prioritisation.




  Assisted departure from the Occupied Palestinian Territories (DFAT)


22 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
A 4-tier model for crisis coordination
The Australian Government uses a 4-tier approach to guide and support appropriate
and consistent levels of coordination in response to crises.
There is no standardised response to crises. Every crisis is unique and will present different
challenges. As the nature of a crisis changes over time, the Australian Government must be
able to shift and adapt its coordination in accordance with the severity and complexity of
the impacts and consequences.
The Australian Government’s 4-tier crisis coordination model helps Australian Government
ministers and officials to consider the severity and complexity of a crisis, its impacts and
consequences, and to:
   • determine the appropriate crisis coordination and decision-making needs and
     the appropriate mechanisms to respond to these needs
   • decide when to escalate or de-escalate the tier of crisis coordination
   • manage responses to both a crisis and its consequences as they become clear
  • adjust the coordination over time if required by evolving impacts and consequences,
     including the ability to change the Lead Minister and Australian Government
     Coordinating Agency.
The Handbook provides Lead Coordinating Senior Officials with principles-based crisis
management guidance, including the application of the 4-tier model.




                               Support            Coordinated            Coordinated       Coordinated
                               from the             by the                 by the            by the
                              Australian           Australian             Australian        National
                             Government           Government             Government        Emergency
                             Coordinating         Coordinating           Coordinating      Management
                                Agency              Agency                 Agency            Agency




                              Tier 1              Tier 2                 Tier 3            Tier 4

                                                                                            Extreme to
                                Limited              Major                  Severe
                                                                                           catastrophic
                               impact/              impact/                impact/
                                                                                             impact/
                              complexity           complexity             complexity
                                                                                            complexity




                                                        Severity and complexity




Figure 7. The Australian Government’s 4-tier crisis coordination model15


15 The tiers of coordination refers to the scale of Australian Government coordination required. The severity and complexity
   of a crisis would influence the scale of coordination required among other factors, and therefore influence how the tier of
   coordination is determined.

23 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Roles and responsibilities
An important function of this Framework is articulating the roles and responsibilities
of Australian Government ministers and senior officials. During a significant crisis, clarity
of purpose and priorities is crucial for ensuring that an Australian Government response
is aligned and effective, and sustains community trust.
This Framework designates Lead Ministers, Australian Government Coordinating Agencies
and Lead Coordinating Senior Officials for identified hazards. Where there are concurrent
events (including multiple hazards) with converging consequences and priorities,
or there is no clearly identified hazard (see Appendix A on p. 47), PM&C will work with
NEMA and relevant Australian Government agency officials to identify an appropriate
Australian Government Coordinating Agency, dependent on the realised or likely impacts
and consequences of the hazard(s) and required Australian Government capabilities.
To facilitate a consistent approach, definitions for the key roles are provided below.
  • A Lead Minister is the Australian Government minister responsible for leading
    coordination in response to a significant crisis (or concurrent crises with converging
    consequences) caused by one or more identified hazards under this Framework.
  • An Australian Government Coordinating Agency is the agency required to lead the
    coordination across the Australian Government for a significant crisis (or concurrent
    crises with converging consequences) caused by one or more identified hazards under
    this Framework. This agency also leads the consequence management16 activities within
    its agency functions and sector-specific responsibilities.
       ◦ Subject to agreement, an Australian Government Coordinating Agency can change
         during a crisis should the impacts evolve over time to predominantly affect
         a different Australian Government portfolio or where NEMA assumes the role.
       ◦ Following a change, the former Australian Government Coordinating Agency would
         become a Sector Lead Agency and continue to lead the consequence management
         activities within its agency functions and sector-specific responsibilities including
         their national plan phase changes.
  • A Lead Coordinating Senior Official is the designated senior official within an
    Australian Government Coordinating Agency who is responsible for leading the
    Australian Government coordination for a significant crisis (or concurrent crises
    with converging consequences).
  • A Sector Lead Agency is an Australian Government agency that contributes to whole
    of Australian Government crisis coordination activities and leads the consequence
    management activities relevant to agency functions and sector-specific responsibilities.
  • An Enabling Agency is an Australian Government agency that administers relevant
    programs, provides specialist technical, scientific, intelligence or information
    capabilities, service delivery, or conducts any other enabling activities to support
    consequence management activities.




16 Consequence management refers to a process undertaken to predict, identify, manage and minimise negative outcomes
   and impacts from crises.

24 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
The establishment of the roles of Lead Minister, Australian Government Coordinating
Agency and Lead Coordinating Senior Official under the Framework does not displace the
existing executive responsibilities of ministers and senior officials. During a crisis, ministers
and senior officials retain their statutory powers, with agencies and officials continuing to
report to their respective ministers. This applies across all tiers of crisis coordination.

Figure 8. Key roles and their responsibilities


  Roles                 Responsibilities


  Lead Minister         • Provides advice to the Prime Minister and the National Security Committee
                          of Cabinet (NSC) (or other Committees of Cabinet) on whole of Australian
                          Government crisis priorities and consequence management objectives.
                        • Oversees a coordinated Australian Government response to crisis and
                          coordinates ministerial activities by collaborating with other Australian,
                          state and territory counterparts.
                        • Exercises executive responsibilities and decision-making in consultation
                          with Australian Government ministers with relevant interests.
                        • Ensures there are systems and procedures available so that they
                          are readily contactable.
                        • Ensures their office maintains business continuity plans in the event
                          that the office is affected directly by a crisis.
                        • Acts as the key Australian Government spokesperson in alignment with
                          a whole of Australian Government crisis communications strategy.
                        • Records ministerial decisions and actions relevant to the crisis.


  Other                 • Ensure their portfolios are prepared to support crisis coordination.
  ministers             • Provide advice to the Prime Minister and the NSC (or other Committees
                          of Cabinet) on Australian Government crisis priorities and objectives
                          relevant to their respective portfolio responsibilities.
                        • Oversee the consequence management activities of agencies within
                          their portfolio.
                        • Retain and execute executive responsibilities and decision-making in
                          consultation with Australian Government ministers with relevant interests.
                        • Record ministerial decisions and actions relevant to the crisis.




25 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Roles                 Responsibilities


  Lead                  • Ensures that their agency (an Australian Government Coordinating Agency
  Coordinating            designated under the Framework) is prepared and positioned to coordinate
                          Australian Government actions in response to crisis or crises caused by
  Senior
                          their designated identified hazard(s)
  Official              • Advises and supports the Lead Minister in executing the Lead Minister’s
                          responsibilities.
                        • Where the Lead Minister is the Prime Minister, advises and supports the
                          Prime Minister through PM&C.
                        • Assesses the level of crisis coordination required, and establishes, reviews
                          and adapts the appropriate tier of coordination over the course of the crisis.
                        • Maintains near real time situational awareness and monitors impacts and
                          consequences of the crisis across all sectors, including awareness of
                          Australian Government agencies’ capacity to coordinate response efforts.
                        • Facilitates shared situational awareness across the Australian Government
                          and nationally.
                        • Facilitates agreement to whole of Australian Government coordination
                          priorities and objectives.
                        • Ensures coordination of cross-government advice to relevant ministers.
                        • Engages and collaborates with counterparts in Sector Lead Agencies
                          and Enabling Agencies to ensure the requirements under this Framework
                          are being met.
                        • Regularly convenes an overarching senior officials’ coordination forum during
                          a crisis in collaboration with senior official responsible for the relevant forum.
                        • In line with chairing arrangements, co-chairs the peak senior official’s crisis
                          coordination committee and briefs NSC (or other Committee of Cabinet),
                          as required.
                        • Maintains clear lines of communication with the Lead Minister’s office.
                        • Coordinates development of a whole of Australian Government crisis
                          communications strategy and ensures the dissemination of crisis
                          communications products and public information (such as whole
                          of government talking points and briefing materials).
                        • Coordinates strategic planning activities.
                        • Maintains oversight of any requests for or offers of assistance received by
                          Australian Government agencies from state, territory or foreign governments,
                          coordinating with responsible agencies, including DFAT and NEMA.
                        • Manages risks related to crisis coordination.
                        • Engages with counterparts in states, territories and/or international jurisdictions
                          as required, coordinating with responsible agencies including DFAT and NEMA.
                        • As crisis coordination concludes, ensures transfer of any ongoing
                          responsibilities and processes to relevant senior officials, agencies
                          (including state and territory leads) and recovery coordination mechanisms.
                        • Conducts post-response evaluation and supports integration of relevant lessons
                          identified into the continuous improvement of the Australian Government’s crisis
                          management arrangements, including plans and capabilities.
                        • Maintains records of decisions and actions relevant to the crisis.




26 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Roles                 Responsibilities


  Australian             • Monitors crisis events that may impact the interests and responsibilities
  Government               of agencies across the Australian Government.
  Coordinating           • Supports the Lead Coordinating Senior Official in making decisions
  Agency                   and recommendations on the level of coordination and response required.
                         • Harnesses capabilities and resources in line with coordination requirements
                           from within the portfolio, and from other agencies when portfolio-managed
                           options are insufficient.
                         • Provides secretariat and convening functions for sector-specific committees.
                         • Supports development and coordination of a whole of Australian
                           Government crisis communications strategy and ensures the dissemination
                           of crisis communications products and public information (such as whole
                           of government talking points and briefing materials).
                         • As crisis coordination concludes, supports the transfer of any continuing
                           functions and responsibilities to relevant officials and agencies
                           (including state and territory leads) and recovery coordination mechanisms.
                         • Conducts post-response evaluation and supports integration of
                           relevant lessons identified into the continuous improvement of the
                           Australian Government’s crisis management arrangements, including plans
                           and capabilities.
                         • When a crisis occurs in an Australian External Territory, works with
                           the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
                           Communications, Sport and the Arts (DITRDCSA) to coordinate
                           crisis management.
                         • Deploys liaison officers to the NSR, DFAT CC or other operations centres
                           as required to support situational awareness.
                         • Engages with counterparts in states, territories and/or international
                           jurisdictions, coordinating with responsible agencies including NEMA
                           and DFAT as required.
                         • Maintains business continuity plans to ensure the agency can continue
                           to perform its role if it is affected directly by a crisis.
                         • Maintains records of decisions and actions relevant to the crisis.




27 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Roles                 Responsibilities


  Sector Lead           • Monitors crisis events that may impact the agency’s interests and
  Agency                  responsibilities.
                        • Conducts sector-specific responses and consequence management
                          activities within its own portfolio, including coordination across jurisdictional
                          equities as required.
                        • Deploys liaison officers to the NSR, DFAT CC or other operations centres
                          as required to support shared situational awareness.
                        • Proactively contributes to the whole of Australian Government crisis
                          communications strategy, dissemination of crisis communications products
                          and public information (such as whole of government talking points and
                          briefing materials).
                        • Engages with counterparts in states, territories and/or international
                          jurisdictions, coordinating with responsible agencies including DFAT
                          and NEMA as required.
                        • Manages risks related to the consequence management activities within
                          their own portfolios.
                        • Maintains business continuity plans to ensure the agency can continue
                          to perform its role if it is affected directly by a crisis.
                        • Maintains records of decisions and actions relevant to the crisis.

  Enabling              • Administers relevant programs.
  Agency                • Provides specialist technical, scientific, intelligence or information
                          capabilities.
                        • Supports or conducts any other enabling activities, including service delivery,
                          to support consequence management activities.
                        • Deploys liaison officers to the NSR, DFAT CC or other operations centres
                          as required to support shared situational awareness.
                        • Proactively contributes to the whole of Australian Government crisis
                          communications strategy, dissemination of crisis communications products
                          and public information (such as whole of government talking points and
                          briefing materials).
                        • Engages with counterparts in states, territories and/or international
                          jurisdictions as required, coordinating with responsible agencies including
                          NEMA and DFAT.
                        • Maintains business continuity plans to ensure the agency can continue
                          to perform its role if it is affected directly by a crisis.
                        • Maintains records of decisions and actions relevant to the crisis.




28 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  The Prime Minister

   Depending on the nature and scale of the crisis, the Prime Minister may decide to lead
   some or all elements of the Australian Government’s preparation for, response to and
   recovery from a crisis, including acting as the key Australian Government spokesperson.
   When this occurs, the Prime Minister will undertake the Lead Minister role and advise
   ministers which elements of coordination the Prime Minister will lead and which
   elements the relevant portfolio minister will continue to lead, in line with the principles
   of Cabinet Government.17 For a list of coordination responsibilities relevant to the Lead
   Minister role, see Figure 8.
   The Prime Minister may convene the NSC or other Committees of Cabinet as
   the Prime Minister deems necessary. The Prime Minister may also convene the
   National Cabinet at short notice to ensure coordinated action across Australian,
   state and territory governments.
   The Prime Minister may advise the Governor-General to make a national emergency
   declaration (NED) in accordance with the National Emergency Declaration Act 2020.
   The process for making a NED, including legal and consultation thresholds, is outlined
   in the National Emergency Declaration Aide-Mémoire, maintained by PM&C.
   The Prime Minister is the Lead Minister for Tier 4 coordination. The Prime Minister
   may delegate the Lead Minister role to another minister. At Tier 4 where NEMA is
   the Australian Government Coordinating Agency, NEMA will brief the Prime Minister
   through PM&C.


  Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
   PM&C is responsible for the policy settings for whole of Australian Government crisis
   management arrangements. It is responsible for maintaining this Framework and
   the Handbook.
   If required, PM&C can:
     • initiate an Australian Government response
     • determine the initial tier of coordination and adjust the tier over time
     • determine the initial Australian Government Coordinating Agency
     • co-chair the peak senior officials’ crisis coordination committee, including the NCM
       or Inter-Departmental Emergency Task Force (IDETF)
     • change the Australian Government Coordinating Agency and Lead Coordinating
       Senior Official following consultation with relevant senior officials
     • initiate escalation to NEMA-led coordination (see the Coordination for extreme
       to catastrophic crises (Tier 4) section on p. 38).




17 The principles of Cabinet Government can be found in the Cabinet Handbook at:
   https://www.pmc.gov.au/government/administration/cabinet-handbook-15th-edition/cabinet-government-australia

29 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  National Emergency Management Agency
   NEMA is the custodian of Australian Government crisis capabilities that support
   some or all elements of crisis coordination.
   NEMA:
     • administers the NCM on behalf of Australian Government agencies
     • supports whole of Australian Government situational awareness through
       the NSR and NJCOP
     • supports Australian Government crisis management capabilities by providing
       best practice guidance, including for preparatory and strategic planning,
       crisis communication and recovery.

   The Deputy Coordinator-General, Emergency Management and Response, NEMA
   (DCG EMR NEMA) is responsible for Australian Government crisis preparedness,
   response, relief, and transition to early recovery.
   DCG EMR NEMA:
     • chairs (or co-chairs) the NCM
     • supports timely, accurate and coordinated decision making
     • oversees the NSR.

   NEMA is the Australian Government Coordinating Agency responsible for whole of
   Australian Government coordination during extreme and catastrophic crises (Tier 4).
   For more details, see the ‘Coordination for extreme and catastrophic crises (Tier 4)’
   section on p. 38.
   NEMA may also lead Tier 3 coordination at the request of the designated
   Australian Government Coordinating Agency, subject to the designated Australian
   Government Coordinating Agency demonstrating that response requirements are
   beyond its coordination capacity or capability. PM&C may also initiate transition to
   NEMA-led coordination.
   NEMA is the default Australian Government Coordinating Agency when a crisis is
   novel or not designated in the Framework, or when there are concurrent crises, until
   such time as an appropriate Australian Government Coordinating Agency is agreed.
   The Minister responsible for Emergency Management is the default Lead Minister
   until such time that an appropriate Lead Minister is agreed.




30 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Decision-making and coordination mechanisms
Australian Government ministers and officials use various mechanisms to conduct crisis
coordination, depending on the nature of the crisis. These mechanisms can rapidly bring
relevant stakeholders together to ensure that the crisis response is aligned within the
Australian Government as well as between governments and industry, and based on
expert advice.
These mechanisms are established as needed, in line with coordination requirements.
Australian Government ministerial decisions may be supported through the NSC, the
National Cabinet, or other ministerial forums deemed appropriate by the Prime Minister
to address the requirements of the crisis.



            Australian                                                  State and territory
                                                      National
           Government                                                      government
                                                    coordination
           coordination                                                    coordination



                                                                          State and territory
            Prime Minister                           National Cabinet       First Ministers




             National Security
          Committee of Cabinet                                            State and territory
           (or other Committee                                                 cabinets
                of Cabinet)




     Inter-
  Departmental                                                            State and territory
                             National Coordination Mechanisms                committees
   Emergency
   Task Force




               Australian                                                 State and territory
              Government                                                      agencies
               agencies




              Agency-led
              coordination
              mechanisms




Figure 9. Mechanisms to support decision-making during crisis coordination




31 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
The National Security Committee of Cabinet
The NSC is the peak all-hazards crisis decision-making committee of Cabinet. During crises,
the Australian Government can make time-critical ministerial decisions and coordinate
responses through short-notice meetings of the NSC. Where NSC crisis considerations have
implications for the portfolios of non-NSC ministers, the Prime Minister may agree to co-opt
these ministers to the meeting. Where deemed appropriate by the Prime Minister, the chair(s)
of the relevant peak senior officials’ crisis forum (NCM or IDETF) may be co-opted to the NSC to:
  • provide coordinated cross-government updates
  • provide advice on resource prioritisation
  • provide advice on communications to the public
  • inform crisis-related decision-making.
PM&C will provide advice to the Prime Minister as required on co-option of non-NSC
ministers, and chair(s) of the peak senior officials’ crisis forum to the NSC.
The Prime Minister may also convene other Cabinet Committees to support crisis decision
making as the Prime Minister deems appropriate.


National Coordination Mechanism
The NCM is the peak senior officials’ crisis coordination mechanism providing a national
picture of crisis to governments and key stakeholders. The NCM provides the convening
mechanism to bring together Australian Government, state and territory government and
non government representatives immediately before, during and after a crisis.

The NCM is flexible, scalable and vector-agnostic. It facilitates rapid problem definition
and shared situational awareness, and ensures ownership of solutions to drive the rapid
stabilisation of crisis events. It uses a domain- or sector-based approach to promote
collaboration between stakeholders with equities in the crisis, strengthening and formalising
the existing relationships between governments, industry and civil society. During concurrent,
compounding or complex crises, the NCM enables the harnessing of the collective national
capabilities to support communities.

During crisis, the strategic aims of the NCM are to:
  • facilitate whole of Australian Government and national coordination and decision-making
  • maintain near real time situational awareness
  • ensure national leadership and the maintenance of public trust in government systems
  • ensure that the problem is clearly defined and understood
  • agree on lines of effort to mitigate the impacts and consequences of a significant crisis
  • ensure actions are synchronised, coordinated and responsive
  • support the continuity of critical community functions
  • communicate actions and coordinate public messaging
  • reduce harm and the overall severity of the crisis.




32 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
The relevant DCG NEMA (or delegate) convenes and chairs the NCM on behalf of the
Australian Government, supported by NEMA. PM&C may elect to co-chair an NCM. Other
relevant Australian Government agencies may co-chair, at the request of the NEMA chair or
where they are the Australian Government Coordinating Agency. States, territories, private
sector or the not-for-profit sector may request that an NCM is activated for a specific
purpose/issue, noting that a decision to activate an NCM remains a matter for the relevant
DCG NEMA (or delegate).
NCM participation is flexible and can be wide-ranging. In the context of their role in the NCM,
participants bring information, expertise and experience from their sectors, and actively
contribute to shared situational awareness and cross-sectoral coordination of priorities
and actions.
The NCM (including NCM-AUSGOV – see p. 35) has a formalised reporting line to the NSC,
or other relevant Committee of Cabinet as determined by the Prime Minister, during times
of crisis to ensure consistent whole of Australian Government situational awareness and
response recommendations. Where agreed by the Prime Minister, the chair(s) of the NCM
may be co-opted to the NSC to provide briefings on matters related to crisis.
Where appropriate, the chair(s) of the NCM may also brief the Prime Minister and relevant
ministers at the earliest opportunity, following a significant crisis.
For Tier 1 to 3 international crisis coordination, the IDETF is the peak senior officials’
coordination mechanism. In the case where both the NCM and the IDETF are activated,
it is the responsibility of the respective chairs, in consultation with PM&C, to agree which
forum will function as the peak senior officials’ mechanism.
For Tier 4 crisis coordination, the NCM is the peak crisis coordination mechanism,
with IDETF reporting to the NCM.




33 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
                                                                     rdination Mech
                                                            ional Coo              anis
                                                         Nat                           m
                                                                               Prime Minister

                                                                              National Cabinet
                                        s                                                                                                                          Fi r
                                                                                          u r i t y C o mm
                                   er                                   io   na l S e c                             ittee                                                 st
                                 st                                N at                                                                                                        M
                        i   ni                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                                        is




                                                                                           Defence
                    M




                                                                       Eme




                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                 Lega
                                                                        man




                                                                                                                                                                                        te
                t
               rs




                                                                          rgen nt




                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                           age




                                                                                                                                   ta al




                                                                                                                                                                                             s
             Fi




                                                         He




                                                                                                                                sis ion
                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                     nc
                                                           alt




                                                                              cy
                                                                              me




                                                                                                                             as rnat
                                            In                h/




                                                                                                                                e
                                              su              ag                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                             Int
                                                 ra             ed                                                                                           ria
                                                   nc              c                                                                                     nita
                                                     e             ar
                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                      um
                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                  H
                            Co                                                                                                                                              s
                                 ron                                                                                                                                     ain
                                    ial
                                        /m                                    National                                                                        pp
                                                                                                                                                                 ly    ch
                                          or t                                                                                                             Su
                                              ua
                                                ry                        Coordination Node
                  Borde
                        r (pe
                  and goo ople                                               Facilitation of shared situational                                                                Food
                          ds)                                                awareness and common
                                                                             operating picture
                                                                             Problem definition
                  Cyber                                                      Identification of interdependencies                                                       Education

                                                                             Coordination and prioritisation
                                                                             of effort
                                          s                                                                                                                    Ban
                                      fair                                   Action plans                                                                              king
                                 n af                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                       fina nd
                    Fo      reig                                             Communication, information                                   Te
                                                                                                                                             le                            nce
                                                                             and messaging                                                     co
                                                                                                                                                 m
                                                    s                                                                                                  m
                                                  nt                                                                                                       un
                                                ve                                                                                                           ica
                                              re                                                                                                                tio
                                        ajo
                                                                 sa ice




                                                                                                                                                                   ns
                                                                     ty




                                   M
                                                                    t
                                                                   fe
                                                          ub jus




                                                                                                                                         Da
                                                      d p ity,




                                                                                                                                           ta
                                                             lic




                                                                                                                                              an
                                                            r
                                                         cu




                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                         Agr
                                                       Se




                                                                                                                                                  GI
                                                    an




                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                             icu
                                                                                                     Transport
                                                 ter




                                                                                                                                 ltur
                                                                                Energy
                                               Wa




                                                                                                                                     e




                                                                          I m pac
                                                                                    ted communities




Figure 10. National Coordination Mechanism18




18 https://www.nema.gov.au/ncm

34 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Australian Government NCM
The Australian Government NCM (NCM-AUSGOV) is a specialised NCM that supports a
shared whole of Australian Government picture of crisis, with participants drawn from across
the Australian Government.
During crisis, the initial convening of the NCM-AUSGOV should include broad representation
across Australian Government agencies where appropriate, to build a comprehensive
understanding of all Australian Government equities and interests. Participants should
include response and recovery representation from all relevant agencies. This is to ensure
appropriate representation during the crisis response phase, where there is a potential role
for the Australian Government in supporting recovery activities.
Each participating agency will bring information, expertise and experience from their agency
and sector, and actively contribute to shared situational awareness and cross-government
coordination of priorities and actions.
The relevant DCG NEMA (or delegate) is chair and NEMA provides secretariat services in
collaboration with the Australian Government Coordinating Agency, as required. The relevant
Deputy Secretary PM&C (or delegate) may elect to chair or co-chair the NCM-AUSGOV or
delegate this responsibility to the Australian Government Coordinating Agency.
When the focus is on response to a domestic terrorism-related event, the Commonwealth
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator (or delegate) may chair the NCM-AUSGOV, supported by
the Counter-Terrorism Coordination Centre (CTCC) and NEMA. The Deputy Secretary
PM&C (or delegate) may elect to chair or co-chair the NCM-AUSGOV.


Capabilities that support the NCM
The NCM is supported with strategic planning, near real time situational awareness and other
coordination and decision-support functions by:
  • the NSR
  • the NJCOP
  • the CCT
  • the CASP methodology.
The CCT supports coordination of Australian Government operational activities in line
with the strategic intent set by the NCM, including the NCM-AUSGOV.




35 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Inter-Departmental Emergency Task Force
The IDETF is the peak senior officials’ crisis coordination mechanism during Australian
Government responses to international crises between Tiers 1 to 3. The relevant Deputy
Secretary DFAT (or delegate) is the chair, and the relevant Deputy Secretary PM&C (or
delegate) may co-chair with DFAT where appropriate. DFAT provides secretariat services
for the IDETF.
Where agreed by the Prime Minister, the chair(s) of the IDETF may be co-opted to the NSC
to brief on matters related to crises. They should seek to brief the Prime Minister and relevant
ministers through PM&C at the earliest opportunity, where appropriate.
In response to a crisis that has significant international and domestic consequences,
and triggers coordination in line with Tier 4 arrangements, the NCM becomes the peak senior
officials’ crisis coordination forum (see the Coordination for extreme and catastrophic crises
(Tier 4) section on p. 38). In such instances, DFAT remains responsible for delivering response
requirements for all international elements of the crisis, and may convene the IDETF to support
this responsibility. The IDETF, if convened, reports to the NCM, with the IDETF chair(s)
updating the NCM on the international elements of the Australian Government response.
The IDETF chair(s) should also brief DCG EMR NEMA on any offers of, or requests for,
assistance from overseas countries.


Portfolio-based mechanisms
Portfolios that maintain national plans and crisis management arrangements may have
bespoke coordination and advice-seeking mechanisms within their own portfolios.


Special and temporary mechanisms
When existing crisis arrangements are not fit-for-purpose for a specific crisis, it may
be appropriate for the Lead Minister to establish special and temporary mechanisms
in parallel with existing mechanisms to ensure effective and aligned Australian
Government coordination.
These special and temporary mechanisms may include:
  • an inter-departmental committee
  • an ad hoc secretaries’ coordination meeting
  • a dedicated whole of Australian Government taskforce
  • government-industry working groups
  • the appointment of a special envoy.




36 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Any special purpose or temporary mechanisms should be guided by and complement existing
arrangements, to ensure a consistent and effective approach to crisis across the Australian
Government. Where special purpose/temporary mechanisms are established, senior officials
should ensure arrangements are in place to brief their agencies.
The relevant peak senior officials’ crisis coordination mechanism chair (or delegate) should
quickly establish the relationship between the peak and new mechanisms, and communicate
arrangements to relevant agencies/officials. Specifically, the chair (or delegate)
should establish:
  • a clear understanding of respective roles, responsibilities and functions
  • clear lines for information sharing, decision making and accountability
  • a consistent whole of Australian Government communication strategy.


Strategic crisis policy coordination
In significant emerging or protracted crises, there may be the need to establish a whole of
government strategic policy coordination mechanism to consider complex strategic policy
issues arising from the crisis. The need to establish this mechanism may be driven by:
  • a sudden shift in the crisis threat environment that generates the potential for
    significant acute consequences on Australia or Australian interests
  • a severe or protracted crisis prompting the need to shift policy settings to ensure the
    continuation of societal functions, or enable unprecedented support.
This mechanism would work in parallel with the operational coordination undertaken by the NCM.
The mechanism may support consideration of existing policy settings to prevent the
reoccurrence of unintended consequences during crises, and policy issues associated with
the transition to longer-term recovery from crises. It may also be used to address identified
strategic policy or capability gaps, by coordinating rapid policy development, reforms and
proposals. It could be applied during the near-term preparedness, response, relief and early
recovery phases of the Continuum (p. 10).
The mechanism would be aligned with the existing special and temporary purpose
mechanism provisions under this Framework and be integrated with existing operational crisis
coordination mechanisms, particularly the NCM(s). To support this, the chair of the strategic
policy coordination mechanism should participate in relevant NCM(s). The mechanism would
be established and led by PM&C.




37 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Coordination for extreme to catastrophic crises (Tier 4)
For the purpose of an Australian Government response, Tier 4 coordination may be triggered
by any type of hazard(s) where the complexity and severity of impacts and consequences
requires the highest level of coordination across the full span of Australian Government
interests. A crisis requiring Tier 4 coordination may:
  • be caused by any hazard(s)
  • be highly complex, including concurrent, compounding and/or consecutive crisis events,
    resulting in interlinked and cascading consequences requiring coordination across the
    full range of Australian Government and national equities and interests
  • have wide-ranging harmful impacts and consequences across multiple jurisdictions
    and sectors of society, and extreme to catastrophic impacts on Australians
  • have overwhelmed Australia’s technical, non-technical and social systems
    and resources, and degraded or disabled governance structures and strategic
    and operational decision-making functions.
Tier 4 coordination is expected to involve most or all portfolios. It supports whole of nation
responses spanning domestic and international jurisdictions. It could be supported by a
number of national plans, including the Australian Government Catastrophic Crisis Plan
(AUSCATPLAN) maintained by NEMA.
During Tier 4 coordination, ministers, senior officials and their agencies have clear
responsibilities to ensure Australian Government coordination and response activities are well
aligned and responsive as the impacts and consequences of the crisis evolve. The Handbook
provides additional principles-based guidance on roles and responsibilities to initiate and
undertake Tier 4 coordination.


   The establishment of the roles of Lead Minister, Australian Government Coordinating
   Agency and Lead Coordinating Senior Official (p. 24) under the Framework does not
   displace the existing executive responsibilities of ministers and senior officials. During
   a crisis requiring Tier 4 coordination, ministers and senior officials retain their statutory
   powers, with agencies and officials continuing to report to their respective ministers.




38 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Coordination arrangements
The Prime Minister is the Lead Minister for Tier 4 coordination. The Prime Minister
may delegate the Lead Minister role to another minister.
NEMA is the Australian Government Coordinating Agency for Tier 4 coordination.
NEMA will brief the Prime Minister through PM&C.
DCG EMR NEMA is the Lead Coordinating Senior Official for Tier 4 coordination.
During Tier 4 coordination, the NCM is the peak crisis coordination mechanism.
  • The relevant DCG NEMA (or delegate) is a co-chair of the NCM, including
    NCM-AUSGOV.
  • NEMA provides secretariat services to the NCM.
  • The relevant Deputy Secretary PM&C or delegate is a co-chair of the NCM.
  • Where deemed appropriate by the Prime Minister, DCG NEMA and the relevant
    Deputy Secretary PM&C, as co-chairs of the NCM, may be co-opted to the NSC
    to inform ministerial decision making.
The NCM may be informed by subsidiary sector-specific coordination forums, including
inter-departmental committees, or sector-specific NCMs.
The IDETF is the peak senior officials’ crisis coordination mechanism for international
crises during Tiers 1–3 coordination, and reports to the NCM during Tier 4 coordination.
Where another agency was responsible for Australian Government coordination prior
to transitioning to NEMA at Tier 4, that agency may consider co-locating operational
officers to the NSR to support whole of Australian Government coordination.
Other Australian Government agencies and ministers retain responsibility for leading
consequence management activities within their own sectors, including existing
legislative power and responsibilities.




39 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Recovery




Bushfire recovery at Kangaroo Island (NEMA)
  Preparedness                   Response                      Relief                          Recovery




Figure 11. The recovery phase of the Continuum

The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) defines recovery as:


  ‘the restoring or improving of livelihoods and health, as well as economic, physical,
  social, cultural and environmental assets, systems and activities, of a disaster-affected
  community or society, aligning with the principles of sustainable development and
  “build back better”, to avoid or reduce future disaster risk.’


The recovery phase encompasses considerations for the built environment, the social
environment, the natural environment and the economic environment.

The recovery phase of the Continuum (p. 10) comprises early recovery and longer-term
recovery. The coordination arrangements in this Framework span near-term preparedness,
response, relief and early recovery.
  • Early recovery refers to temporary, near-term measures that support anticipated
    community needs, such as transitional shelter, services and supplies. During early
    recovery, the restoration of critical infrastructure would also be underway. This may
    occur alongside operational response and relief efforts.
  • Longer-term recovery refers to the transition from the temporary measures established
    during early recovery to more permanent, ongoing arrangements that reflect and
    support community priorities. This may include the reconstruction of the built
    environment, and the restoration of community connections, relationships, networks
    and social structures.

States and territories are responsible for crisis management at the jurisdictional level,
including recovery. The Australian Government provides financial assistance to states
and territories for eligible recovery activities through programs such as the DRFA.19

Successful recovery relies on:
  • understanding the context
  • recognising complexity
  • enabling community-led approaches
  • ensuring coordination of all activities
  • employing effective communication
  • acknowledging and building capacity for future resilience.



19 Details of the DRFA are available at:
   https://www.nema.gov.au/our-work/disaster-recovery/disaster-recovery-funding-arrangements

41 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Recovery planning
All national plans under the Framework are required to address early recovery
considerations to ensure the Australian Government is prepared from the onset of crisis
to support early recovery.20
The Crisis Recovery Coordination Plan supports Australian Government agencies to plan
for recovery.


Longer-term recovery
As the Australian Government changes its focus from early recovery to longer-term recovery,
more enduring arrangements may be required to support ongoing coordination of Australian
Government activities, programs and strategic policy. Following a significant crisis, this
may require establishment of special purpose or temporary mechanisms to coordinate
the implementation of policy and programs by Australian, state and territory governments.
The roles and responsibilities of government agencies and officials supporting recovery
should be defined within those mechanisms.




20 The National Principles for Disaster Recovery are outlined at:
   https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/resources/national-principles-for-disaster-recovery/

42 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
43 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Key legislation
  Legislation           Description


  National              • The making of a NED signals to the Australian community – and to all levels
  Emergency               of government across Australia – the severity of a crisis. It also provides clarity
                          about the Commonwealth’s role and the statutory powers available to the
  Declaration
                          Australian Government ministers to handle a significant crisis.
  Act 2020              • A NED can be made for a period of up to 3 months, and can be extended
                          by the Governor-General for periods up to 3 months.
                        • The Governor‑General may declare a national emergency, on advice of the
                          Prime Minister, in certain circumstances, including if the Prime Minister is
                          satisfied that an emergency (whether occurring in or outside Australia) is causing
                          harm that is nationally significant in Australia or in an Australian offshore area.
                        • PM&C, the Department of Home Affairs and NEMA are responsible for
                          providing advice on operational and legal policy matters relevant to the Act,
                          including preparing advice for the Prime Minister about making a declaration.
                          The process for making a NED, including legal thresholds and consultation
                          requirements, is outlined in the National Emergency Declaration Aide-Mémoire,
                          maintained by PM&C.

  Part IIIAAA of        • Sets out of the statutory process for Defence Force Aid to the Civil Authority
  the Defence             (DFACA) ‘Call Out’ of the Australian Defence Force (ADF) to protect Commonwealth
                          interests or states and territories against ‘domestic violence’ as defined by the Act.
  Act 1903
                          Part IIIAAA is used in circumstances where the ADF may be required to use force.
  (Defence              • The Governor-General may make a decision to call out the ADF on the
  Force Aid               advice of the authorising ministers, being the Prime Minister, Minister for
  to the Civil            Defence and Attorney-General.
                        • Defence’s policy framework for Part IIIAAA is the Defence Policy Guide:
  Authority)
                          Threshold for call out of the Australian Defence Force and Guidelines for
                          requesting support from the Australian Defence Force (Call Out) under Part IIIAAA
                          of the Defence Act 1903 by States and Territories.
                        • Separately, Defence can provide assistance to civilian agencies where there is
                          no contemplated use of force through Defence Assistance to the Civil Community
                          (DACC). The Defence Assistance to the Civil Community Policy and the Defence
                          Assistance to the Civil Community Manual are the policy frameworks for DACC.

  Section 28 of         • Provides Defence access to additional human resources beyond the permanent
  the Defence             forces and those Reservists who have volunteered to support a crisis response.
                        • The Minister responsible for Defence, after consultation with the Prime Minister,
  Act 1903
                          may recommend the Reserve Call Out to the Governor-General.
  (Reserve              • The Reserve Call Out may not be an appropriate mechanism for responding
  Call Out)               to a crisis and is not tethered to a NED.

  Biosecurity           • The Governor-General may make a biosecurity emergency declaration if the
  Act 2015                Minister responsible for Agriculture is satisfied that the declaration is necessary
                          to prevent or control the establishment or spread of the disease or pest under
                          Chapter 8 Part 1 of the Act.
                        • Minister responsible for Health may exercise powers relevant to the management
                          of a human health biosecurity risk under Chapter 8 Part 2 of the Act.
                        • Minister responsible for Agriculture or Director of Biosecurity, may exercise
                          powers to manage biosecurity risks including monitoring, control and response
                          during a biosecurity emergency period under Chapter 8 Part 1 of the Act. These
                          may be exercised anywhere in the Australian territory, as defined by the Act.



45 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Appendices
Appendix A
Designated Lead Ministers, Lead Coordinating Senior
Officials and Australian Government Coordinating
Agencies for identified hazards
Where a hazard is not identified, PM&C will work with NEMA and other relevant
Australian Government agencies to identify an appropriate Australian Government Coordinating
Agency, depending on where the impacts and consequences of the hazard primarily fall.


   Identified hazards

   Cyber Incidents


   A cyber incident is a single or series of unwanted or unexpected event(s) that have the
   potential to impact the confidentiality, integrity or availability of a network or system or
   the information that it stores, processes or communicates. This may result in significant
   disruption to the functioning of government or provision of government services; critical
   infrastructure or the provision of essential services; or may require a coordinated national
   response. This may include unauthorised or malicious sharing of data, manipulation or
   destruction of critical data and software, disruptions to ICT networks or systems, and
   exploitation of networks to cause a physical effect. A response to a cyber incident may
   require coordination under the Framework as a result of the technical considerations
   of the event, such as those detailed under the CIMA, or following consideration of the
   broader consequences of the cyber incident.

 National plan(s)          Lead Minister          Australian            Lead                Coordination
                                                  Government            Coordinating        mechanism21
                                                  Coordinating          Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 Australian                Minister               Department of         National            NCM
 Cyber                     responsible for        Home Affairs          Cyber Security
                                                                                            IDETF
 Response Plan             Cyber Security         (National Office of   Coordinator or
 (AUSCYBERPLAN)                                   Cyber Security)       other relevant
                                                                        Deputy Secretary,
                                                                        Department of
                                                                        Home Affairs




21 Abbreviations are listed in Appendix C.

47 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Domestic biosecurity crises


  An incident where a disease or pest or is posing a severe and immediate threat or
  causing harm to Australia’s animals or plant health, the environment or the economy
  and requires a whole-of-government response.

 National plan(s)           Lead Minister           Australian             Lead                Coordination
                                                    Government             Coordinating        mechanism
                                                    Coordinating           Senior Official
                                                    Agency

 Australian                 Minister                Department             Deputy Secretary    • NCM
 Government                 responsible             of Agriculture,        responsible         • National
 Biosecurity and            for Agriculture         Fisheries and          for Biosecurity,      Management
 Agricultural                                       Forestry               DAFF                  Group
 Response Plan
 (AUSBIOAGPLAN)

  Domestic energy supply crises


  A domestic energy supply crisis that requires a whole-of-government response.
  This may include liquid fuel supply, natural gas supply or power supply.

 National plan(s)                 Lead Minister          Australian          Lead               Coordination
                                                         Government          Coordinating       mechanism
                                                         Coordinating        Senior Official
                                                         Agency

  • National Liquid Fuels         Minister               Department          Deputy             • NCM
    Emergency Response            responsible            of Climate          Secretary          • Liquid fuel
    Plan (NLFERP)                 for Energy             Change, Energy,     responsible          – NOSEC
  • Interruption to Gas                                  the Environment     for Energy,        • Natural gas
    Supply Process                                       and Water           DCCEEW               – NGERAC
    (ITGSP)                                                                                     • Power
  • Power System                                                                                  system
    Emergency                                                                                     emergency
    Management Plan                                                                               – NEMEMF
    (PSEMP)




48 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Domestic natural hazard disasters


  A domestic rapid onset event that requires a whole-of-government response.
  This may include bushfires, earthquakes, riverine floods, storms, tropical cyclones,
  storm surges, landslides, tsunamis, meteorite strikes or tornados.

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian           Lead                 Coordination
                                                  Government           Coordinating         mechanism
                                                  Coordinating         Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 Australian              Minister                 National             Deputy               • NCM
 Government              responsible              Emergency            Coordinator          • CCOSC
 Disaster                for Emergency            Management           General,
 Response Plan           Management               Agency               Emergency
 (COMDISPLAN)                                                          Management and
                                                                       Response, NEMA

  Domestic public health crises


  A domestic public health incident that requires a whole-of-government response.
  Examples may include an influenza pandemic or a serious infectious disease outbreak
  or a hazardous material incident with nationally significant human health consequences
  (excl. domestic terrorist incidents).

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian           Lead                 Coordination
                                                  Government           Coordinating         mechanism
                                                  Coordinating         Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 National Health         Minister                 Department of        Chief Medical        • NCM
 Emergency               responsible              Health, Disability   Officer,             • AHPC
 Response                for Health               and Ageing           Department of
 Arrangements                                                          Health, Disability
 (NHERA)                                                               and Ageing




49 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Domestic security-related incidents (excl. terrorist incidents)


  A domestic security incident, other than terrorism, cyber crises, and incidents related
  to transport, telecommunications, or energy supply or availability that requires a
  whole-of-government response. This may include violent civil unrest, foreign
  interference, sabotage, and espionage.

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian      Lead               Coordination
                                                  Government      Coordinating       mechanism
                                                  Coordinating    Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 Australian              Minister                 Department of   Head of National   • NCM
 Government              responsible              Home Affairs    Security,
 Domestic Security       for Home Affairs                         Department of
 Crisis Plan                                                      Home Affairs
 (AUSSECPLAN)

  Domestic terrorist incidents


  A domestic terrorist incident (suspected or declared) that requires a
  whole-of-government response. A terrorist incident is an act, or threat to commit an act,
  that is done with the intention to coerce or influence the public or any government by
  intimidation to advance a political, religious or ideological cause, and the act causes:
    • death, serious harm or endangers a person
    • serious damage to property
    • a serious risk to the health or safety of the public
    • the serious interference with, disruption, or destruction, of critical infrastructure.

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian      Lead               Coordination
                                                  Government      Coordinating       mechanism
                                                  Coordinating    Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 National Counter        Minister                 Department of   Commonwealth       • NCM
 Terrorism Plan          responsible for          Home Affairs    Counter-
 (NCTP)                  Home Affairs                             Terrorism
                                                                  Coordinator




50 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Incidents involving an offshore petroleum facility in Commonwealth waters


  Incidents may include any non-security related event that occurs at, or has a direct link
  to, an offshore petroleum facility in Commonwealth waters (e.g. fire, oil spill) and requires
  a whole-of-government response.

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian          Lead               Coordination
                                                  Government          Coordinating       mechanism
                                                  Coordinating        Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 Offshore                Minister                 Department of       Deputy Secretary   • NCM
 Petroleum               responsible              Industry, Science   responsible for    • OPICC
 Incident                for Resources            and Resources       Resources, DISR
 Coordination
 Framework

  International crises


  An international incident that requires an Australian Government response.
  This may include natural hazard disasters, humanitarian crises, terrorist acts,
  major transport incidents, civil unrest, overseas health emergencies or outbreaks,
  kidnapping of Australians overseas and chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
  incidents which impact or may impact Australians or Australia’s national interest.


 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian          Lead               Coordination
                                                  Government          Coordinating       mechanism
                                                  Coordinating        Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 International           Minister                 Department of       Deputy Secretary   • IDETF
 Crisis                  responsible for          Foreign Affairs     responsible        • NCM
 Management              Foreign Affairs          and Trade           for Consular
 Framework                                                            and Crisis
 (ICMF)                                                               Management,
                                                                      DFAT




51 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Maritime terrorist incidents within the Australian Security Forces Authority Area


  A maritime terrorist incident (suspected or declared) within the Australian Security Forces
  Authority Areas that requires a whole-of-government response, including piracy, robbery
  and violence at sea. The Security Forces Authority Area is synonymous with Australia’s
  Search and Rescue Region. The Australian Government has direct responsibility for
  offshore maritime terrorism prevention, response and recovery, from the territorial sea
  baseline to the outer boundary of Australia’s Security Forces Authority Area. Maritime
  terrorist incidents may include:
  •    attacks on fixed infrastructure
  •    attacks against vessels
  •    attacks on commercial interests or
  •    incidents mounted from, or through, the maritime environment.


 National plan(s)                  Lead Minister         Australian         Lead               Coordination
                                                         Government         Coordinating       mechanism
                                                         Coordinating       Senior Official
                                                         Agency

 Australian Government             Minister              Australian         Commander           • NCM
 Maritime Counter-                 responsible for       Border Force       Maritime Border
 Terrorism Response Plan           Home Affairs          (Maritime          Command
 (AUSMCTPLAN)                                            Border
                                                         Command)
 Australian Government
 Piracy, Robbery and
 Violence at Sea Response
 Plan (AUSPRVSPLAN)

  Radiological/nuclear incidents (excl. domestic terrorist incidents)


  A radiological or nuclear incident that requires a whole-of-government response.
  It may be caused by ionising radiation in emergency exposure situations.
  An emergency exposure situation arises as a result of an accident, a malicious act,
  or any other unexpected event, and requires prompt action in order to avoid or reduce
  adverse consequences.

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian            Lead                  Coordination
                                                  Government            Coordinating          mechanism
                                                  Coordinating          Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 Australian              Minister                 Australian            Chief Radiation       • NCM
 Government              responsible for          Radiation             Health Scientist/
 Radiological            Health                   Protection and        Chief Executive
 and Nuclear                                      Nuclear Safety        Officer, ARPANSA
 Events Plan                                      Agency
 (AUSRNEPLAN)



52 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Space weather events


  Space weather events are global, and may have significant national impacts for Australia
  that require a whole-of-government response. Space weather may disrupt many of
  Australia’s critical infrastructure assets, such as the electricity grid, Position, Navigation
  and Timing (PNT) systems, internet connectivity and satellite and radio communication
  systems. Many industries and government sectors may be impacted if there are
  interruptions to communications and navigation, and a loss of power.


 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian              Lead                  Coordination
                                                  Government              Coordinating          mechanism
                                                  Coordinating            Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 Australian              Minister                 National                Deputy                • NCM
 Government              responsible              Emergency               Coordinator
 Space                   for Emergency            Management              General,
 Weather Plan            Management               Agency                  Emergency
 (AUSSWEPLAN)                                                             Management and
                                                                          Response, NEMA

  Transport incidents within Australia, the Australian Search and Rescue Region,
  or the Australian Exclusive Economic Zone


  Transport incidents (maritime, aviation, road and rail), other than terrorism, that require
  a whole-of-government response. This may include crashes of, and search and rescue
  efforts for, commercial aircraft and vessels (within Australia or the Australian Search
  and Rescue Region), maritime environmental emergencies (including maritime casualties,
  oil and/or hazardous and noxious substance spills within the Australian Exclusive
  Economic Zone) stemming from these incidents, and may also include major disruptions
  to road and rail infrastructure which impact on supply chains across multiple jurisdictions.


 National plan(s)              Lead Minister             Australian           Lead               Coordination
                                                         Government           Coordinating       mechanism
                                                         Coordinating         Senior Official
                                                         Agency

 The Australian                Minister                  Department           Deputy             •   NCM
 Government                    responsible               of Infrastructure,   Secretary          •   NPSCC
 Coordination                  for Transport             Transport,           responsible        •   APG
 Arrangements for                                        Regional             for Transport,     •   MESCC
 Maritime Environment                                    Development,         DITRDCSA
 Emergencies                                             Communications,
                                                         Sports and
 National Search                                         the Arts
 and Rescue Manual




53 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Novel or ambiguous hazard


  A novel or ambiguous hazard is a hazard that has not been anticipated, and cannot be
  responded to using any existing Australian Government crisis plans.

 National plan(s)        Lead Minister            Australian          Lead                 Coordination
                                                  Government          Coordinating         mechanism
                                                  Coordinating        Senior Official
                                                  Agency

 N/A                     Minister                 National            Deputy               • NCM
                         responsible              Emergency           Coordinator-
                         for Emergency            Management          General,
                         Management               Agency              Emergency
                         (as the default          (as the default     Management
                         until such time          until such time     and Response,
                         that a more              that a more         NEMA (as the
                         appropriate              appropriate         default until such
                         Lead Minister            Australian          time that a more
                         is agreed)               Government          appropriate Lead
                                                  Coordinating        Coordinating
                                                  Agency is agreed)   Senior Official is
                                                                      agreed)




54 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Appendix B
Cross-sectoral all-hazards plans and arrangements

                                                               Plans and                Responsible
  Description
                                                               arrangements             agency

  Catastrophic crises                                          Australian Government    National Emergency
                                                               Catastrophic Crisis      Management Agency
                                                               Plan (AUSCATPLAN)

  Reception and coordination of international assistance       Australian Government    National Emergency
                                                               Reception of             Management Agency
  International offers of assistance may vary significantly,
                                                               International
  arise from any source and be made to any Australian
                                                               Assistance Plan
  Government agency. Any offers of assistance received
                                                               (AUSRIAPLAN)
  should be appropriately coordinated, considered and
  actioned as required to support jurisdictions and the
  Australian Government’s crisis management priorities.

  Recovery                                                     Crisis Recovery          National Emergency
                                                               Coordination Plan        Management Agency

  Request for non-financial assistance from states,            Australian Government    National Emergency
  territories and offshore territories                         Disaster Response        Management Agency
                                                               Plan (COMDISPLAN)
  State and territory governments have responsibility
  for coordinating and planning for the response to
  and recovery from a disaster within their borders.
  When the total resources (government, community
  and commercial) of an affected jurisdiction cannot
  reasonably cope with the needs of the situation, the
  nominated official can seek non-financial assistance
  from the Australian Government under COMDISPLAN.

  Provision of Australian Government organised physical        Australian               National Emergency
  assistance to overseas countries following a disaster        Government Overseas      Management Agency
                                                               Assistance Plan
                                                                                        Department of Foreign
                                                               (AUSASSISTPLAN)
                                                                                        Affairs and Trade

  Reception into Australia of Australian citizens              Australian Government    National Emergency
  and permanent residents, and their immediate                 Plan for the Reception   Management Agency
  dependents, and approved foreign nationals                   of Australian Citizens
  evacuated from overseas                                      and Approved Foreign
                                                               Nationals Evacuated
                                                               from Overseas
                                                               (AUSRECEPLAN)

  Assessment, repatriation and provision of care for           Australian Government    National Emergency
  Australians and other approved persons injured or            Response Plan for        Management Agency
  killed overseas in mass casualty crises                      Overseas Mass
                                                               Casualty Incidents
                                                               (OSMASSCASPLAN)

  Manage the risk posed by                                     Australian               National Emergency
  re-entering space debris which may impact Australia          Government Space         Management Agency
                                                               Re-entry Debris Plan
                                                               (AUSSPREDPLAN)



55 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
Appendix C
Abbreviations

  Term                Definition

  ADF                 Australian Defence Force

  AGDRP               Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment

  AHPC                Australian Health Protection Committee

  AIDR                Australian Institute for Disaster Resilience

  ANZCTC              Australia-New Zealand Counter-Terrorism Committee

  APG                 Aviation Policy Group

  APS                 Australian Public Service

  APSC                Australian Public Service Commission

  ARPANSA             Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency

  AVTOP               Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment

  CAC                 Crisis Arrangements Committee

  CASP                Crisis Appreciation and Strategic Planning

  CCOSC               Commissioners and Chief Officers Strategic Committee

  CC                  Crisis Centre (DFAT)

  CCT                 Australian Government Crisis Coordination Team

  CIMA                Cyber Incident Management Arrangements for Australian Governments

  CTCC                Counter-Terrorism Coordination Centre

  DACC                Defence Assistance to the Civil Community

  DAFF                Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry

  DCCEEEW             Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water

  DFACA               Defence Force Aid to the Civil Authority

  DFAT                Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

  DISR                Department of Industry, Science and Resources



56 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
  Term                Definition

  DITRDCSA            Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications, Sport and the Arts


  DRA                 Disaster Recovery Allowance

  DRFA                Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements

  GWO                 DFAT Global Watch Office

  IDETF               Inter-Departmental Emergency Task Force

  ITGSP               Interruption to Gas Supply Process

  MESCC               Maritime Emergency Strategic Coordination Committee

  NCM                 National Coordination Mechanism

  NCM-AUSGOV          Australian Government National Coordination Mechanism

  NCSC                National Cyber Security Committee

  NED                 National Emergency Declaration

  NEMA                National Emergency Management Agency

  NEMEMF              National Electricity Market Emergency Management Forum

  NGERAC              National Gas Emergency Response Advisory Committee

  NJCOP               National Joint Common Operating Picture

  NLFERP              National Liquid Fuels Emergency Response Plan

  NOSEC               National Oil Supplies Emergency Committee

  NPSCC               National Plan Strategic Coordination Committee

  NSC                 National Security Committee of Cabinet

  NSR                 Australian Government National Situation Room

  OPICC               Offshore Petroleum Incident Coordination Committee

  PM&C                Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet

  PNT                 Position, Navigation and Timing

  PSEMP               Power System Emergency Management Plan

  SOPs                Standard Operating Procedures

  UNDRR               United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction


57 | Australian Government Crisis Management Framework
